======Disaster Preparation======

----ID your pet----

Make sure that your cat or dog is wearing a collar and identification that is up to date and visible at all times. 
You'll increase your chances of being reunited with a lost pet by having him or her microchipped.If your pet is 
adopted from a shelter or rescue organization, make sure the registration has been transferred to you and is not 
still with the adoption group.

Put your cell phone number on your pet's tag. It may also be a good idea to include the phone number of a friend or
relative outside your immediate area—in case you have had to evacuate.


----Evacuate with your pet----

Rule number one: If it isn't safe for you, it isn't safe for your pets. Even if you think you will only be gone for 
a few hours, take your pets. You have no way of knowing how long you'll be kept out of the area, and you may not be 
able—or allowed—to go back for your pets.

Pets left behind in a disaster can easily be injured, lost, or killed. Those left inside your home can escape through
storm-damaged areas, such as broken windows. And pets turned loose to fend for themselves are likely to become victims
of exposure, starvation, predators, contaminated food or water, or accidents. Leaving dogs tied or chained outside in 
a disaster is a death sentence.

Rule number two: Evacuate early. Don't wait for a mandatory evacuation order. Some people who have waited to be 
evacuated by emergency officials have been told to leave their pets behind.

The smell of smoke, high winds or lightening may make your pet more fearful and difficult to load into a crate or 
carrier. Evacuating before conditions become severe will keep everyone safer and make the process less stressful.


----Care After a Disaster----

Your home may be a very different place after the emergency is over, and it may be hard for your pets to adjust.

Don't allow your pets to roam loose. Familiar landmarks and smells might be gone, and your pet will probably be 
disoriented. Pets can easily get lost in such situations.

While you assess the damage, keep dogs on leashes and cats in carriers inside the house. If your house is damaged,
your pets could escape.

Be patient with your pets after a disaster. Try to get them back into their normal routines as soon as possible. 
Be ready for behavioral problems caused by the stress of the situation. If these problems persist, or if your pet 
seems to be having any health problems, talk to your veterinarian.

If your community has been flooded, search your home and yard for wild animals who may have sought refuge there. 
Stressed wildlife can pose a threat to you and your pet.



======Population Control======

----Nonsurgical Sterilization----

The high cost of surgical sterilization will probably always limit its role as a method of pet population control, particularly in non-affluent parts of the world. Additionally, some people view such surgeries as unaccepable infringements on animal rights.

It is clear that an inexpensive and non-surgical method for permanent contraception would be of enormous benefit. A variety of approaches to this goal have been explored, but to date, none have shown sufficient efficacy to be widely deployed.


----Injectable Chemical Sterilization----

Several investigators have explored injection of irritating chemicals into the testes or epididymides to sterilize dogs and cats. Epididymal injection of such compounds as chlorhexidine gluconate, dilute formaldehyde or zinc tannate have, at times, appeared a promising approach to sterilization. However, when larger scale trials were performed, sterility was not consistently achieved and a significant number of animals developed unsatisfactory inflammatory reactions at the site of injection. This technique is rarely used.

Intratesticular and intraepididymal injection of zinc gluconate neutralized with arginine has shown greater promise than other chemical sterilants, and has been marketed for chemical castration of young dogs (Neutersol). This technique has been shown to be highly effective in eliminating fertility in dogs. However, it does not dramatically reduce secretion of testosterone from the testes, and therefore does not afford the beneficial effects seen with castration. Additionally, sterilizing young male dogs using this technique has not provided substantial cost savings over surgical castration.


----Antifertility Vaccines----

Several studies have been conducted to evaluate immunization against LH (luteinizing hormone) as a method for contraception or sterilization. By using potent adjuvants, such vaccines were effective in some dogs. In general, however, the level and duration of immunity obtained was so variable that LH vaccines have not been pursued. Similar approaches to immunize against gonadotropin-releasing hormone have also failed to achieve effective contraception.


A large amount of research has been expended to develop vaccines against zona pellucida proteins, and some of this work has focused on dogs and cats. The idea is that antibodies to the zona pellucida may inpair oocyte development, impair ovulation or block binding of sperm to the zona pellucida; any of these effects could reduce or abolish fertility. The image to the right shows pig oocytes that have been stained with a fluorescently-tagged control versus anti-zona pellucida antibodies - the bright fluorescence of the two oocytes on the right is due to binding of anti-zona pellucida antibodies.

To date, an effective zona pellucida vaccine for pets has not been announced, and some studies have demonstrated significant side effects (e.g. development of cystic ovaries) after such treatment of dogs.



----Surgical Sterilization----

Surgical sterilization has been the cornerstone of efforts to curb pet overpopulation. While undoubtedly effective in preventing reproduction in individual animals, surgical techniques are far from ideal tools for the simple reason that they are expensive. Many owners cannot afford or choose not to spend the money to "neuter" their pets. Additionally, the procedures requires general anesthesia and invasive surgery, which, while generally very safe, imposes some risk to the animal. Nonetheless, surgical sterilization remains a valuable means of blunting increases in populations of pets.

----Gonadectomy----

The most widely used techniques for surgical sterilization of pets involve removal of the gonads (gonadectomy). Terminology and procedures differ between the two sexes:

In males, each testis with attached epididymis is removed in a procedure commonly referred to as "neutering" or castration. In dogs, both gonads are usually removed through a single incision made just anterior to the scrotum and the incision is sutured closed. Typically in cats, an incision is made into each side of the scrotum and left open to heal.
In females, the uterus is removed in concert with both ovaries in a procedure called "spaying" or ovariohysterectomy. This procedure is usually performed through a incision in the midventral abdomen, although some veterinarians prefer a flank incision. The reason for removal of the uterus is to eliminate the possibility of uterine disease following the sterilization.
Each of these procedures is performed under general anesthesia, which presents a small but finite risk to the animal. As with any surgical procedure, there are occasional complications, including bleeding, infection, or dehiscence (breakdown of the suture line, sometimes from the animal chewing), and postoperative observation is clearly warranted.

In addition to eliminating animals from the breeding pool, gonadectomy has a number of beneficial effects on the animal's health, and from the viewpoint of most owners, on the animal's behavior.

Castration and spaying are most commonly performed on dogs and cats that are 6 or more months old. This practice is at odds with efforts to control pet populations because many animals enter or are approaching puberty by that time, and even a short delay can result in the animal producing offspring. Clearly, it would be advantageous to sterilize most pets well before puberty, and a significant body of research now supports the safety and efficacy of early spay-neuter programs for dogs and cats.

----Other Techniques for Surgical Sterilization----

Surgical techniques not involving the removal of gonads have been applied, though not commonly, to dogs and cats. Vasectomy (cutting the vas deferens) in males and tubal ligation (tying off and cutting the oviducts) in females are not significantly easier to perform that gonadectomy. Although these procedures eliminate the animal from the breeding population, they do not provide the other benefits to animal and owner that are obtained with gonadecomy and are not widely practiced.



----Contraceptives----

The widespread adoption of contraceptives by women and their high degree of efficacy has stimulated great interest in applying these techniques to controlling reproduction in pets.

One of the problems with this approach is that dogs are not women, and tend to be signficantly more sensitive to adverse effects of steroidal contraceptives. Nonetheless, contraceptive drugs have some utility in pet population control.

----Steroidal Contraceptives----

Several steroidal contraceptives similar to those used in women have been evaluated in dogs and, to a lesser extent, cats. Many of these treatments are quite effective in preventing conception. The problem is that they also carry a high risk of inducing serious uterine disease in treated bitches, most prominently pyometra (pus-filled uterus). In the United States, two steroidal contraceptives are currently available for dogs:

Megestrol acetate (Ovaban) is an orally-active progestin. The recommended treatment regimen depends on the stage of the bitch's cycle. Estrus suppression can be attained by initiating treatment with a high dose of drug early in proestrus, and contining for 8 days. Alternatively, treatment with a lower dosage can be started in anestrus and continued for 32 days to achieve estrus postponement. Following treatment, most bitches return to estrus in 4 to 6 months.
Mibolerone (Cheque): is an androgen that is marketed as a liquid to be added to food. It can be used to suppress the onset of estrus for up to 24 months. After discontinuing treatment, most bitches return to estrus in 2 to 3 months.
There are several important factors to consider before treating a bitch with either megestrol or mibolerone - check the product literature or with your veterinarian first. Neither drug is approved for use in cats.

Long-acting or depot preparations of progestins such as medroxyprogesterone acetate (Depo-Provera) have been widely used in Europe as contraceptives in bitches. Although effective, there is a clear increase in risk of inducing uterine disease associated with these treatments.

----Physical Methods for Contraception----

Intrauterine devices are not applicable for dogs and cats due to the extreme difficult of passing anything through the cervix. Plastic intravaginal devices, to prevent penetration by the male, were once marketed for contraceptive purposes in bitches, but were poorly retained and of low efficacy.



======Legislative Activities======

----Federal Laws----

----The Animal Welfare Act---- 

The Animal Welfare Act (AWA), a federal law passed in 1966, regulates certain animal activities, including commercial dog and cat breeding. The AWA defines the minimum standards of care for dogs, cats and certain other species of animals bred for commercial resale, research, and exhibition. It also requires that certain commercial breeders be licensed and routinely inspected by the United State Department of Agriculture (USDA). However, the standards are far from what most people would consider to be humane. They are merely survival standards for dogs. For example, dogs in federally licensed breeding facilities can legally be kept in cages that are only six inches wider than the dog in each direction for their entire lives. Violations often go unpunished. Lack of enforcement by the USDA overall means thousands of dogs are left to suffer in inadequate and inhumane conditions year after year, even in federally licensed facilities.

There is good news, though: Until recently, only animal-breeding businesses considered "wholesale" operations—those that sell animals to brokers or pet stores for resale—were subject to oversight by the USDA. The AWA did not apply to facilities that sell directly to the public, including the thousands that now do so via the Internet. The result was that in many cases, no one regulated or inspected these facilities. Thanks to pressure from the animal welfare community and the public, in September 2013 the USDA issued a change to AWA regulations to close this loophole once and for all—for the first time, so-called “Internet puppy mills” will now be subject to USDA inspections. The rule goes into effect on November 18, 2013. 

Even though the Animal Welfare Act (and the USDA’s enforcement of it) leaves a lot to be desired, authorizing federal inspectors to go behind previously closed kennel doors for the first time will go a long way in improving the lives of tens of thousands of breeding dogs in puppy mills throughout the United States.

----The 2008 Farm Bill---- 

With the evolution of Internet commerce, puppy mills have sprouted up all over the world to provide poorly bred puppies of every imaginable breed and "designer mixed breed" directly to the consumer. As a result, the U.S. market has seen an increase in imported dogs in bad health and/or possibly carrying diseases that could harm people and other animals. Because foreign puppy mills are not subject to U.S. regulations—such as the standards set forth in the Animal Welfare Act—it is likely that many of these dogs are bred and raised in extremely inhumane conditions.

The ASPCA and other animal welfare groups successfully fought for an amendment to the 2008 Farm Bill that prohibits the importation of puppies under six months of age for the purpose of resale. While this was a major victory, five years later the measure still hasn’t gone into effect because the USDA has yet to adopt regulations implementing the law.